# Real or Fake
 
Duration: 10 minutes
Resources: Slide Deck
Artifacts: None
 
"Real or Fake" is an activity intended to familiarize students with the concept of binary
classification. The activity has students identify an image or some text shown in class as a *real*
or *fake* instance.
 
We have chosen a default dataset of real and fake tweets from the 45th President of the United
States of America. The real tweets are public statements made by the President. The faked tweets
are generated by a trained machine learning system.
 
If you would prefer to assemble and use a different dataset, please do.
 
# Instructions
 
The real and fake tweets are contained within the slide deck for this unit. A single tweet will be
shown on each slide. The slide will have the title "Real or Fake?". The next slide after the tweet
in question will contain the answer.
 
How you play the game really depends on how you want to manage the classroom and the level of
energy that you would like the students to use during the activity. The format is:
 
  1. Show a tweet
  1. Ask if the class thinks the tweet is real or fake
  1. Reveal the answer
  1. Repeat...
 
Getting the real vs. fake perspective of the class can be done in numerous ways. Some options
include:
 
  * Have the students stay seated and tally real vs. fake guesses by a show of hands or standing.
  * Have the students move to one side of the class for real and another for fake.
  * Create an online poll in a software such as [kahoot!](https://kahoot.com/) and have the
    students fill out the poll for each question.
 
Note that in the scenario where you have the students move to either side of the class can be
modified by having them move to one side of the class for real, one for fake, and somewhere
in the middle if they aren't quite sure. Those in the middle should gravitate closer to their
feeling on real or fake based on their confidence in their guess. Confidence levels can later be
called out as a feature of some binary classifiers that were physically acted out during the
activity.