.. Copyright (C)  Google, Runestone Interactive LLC
   This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0
   International License. To view a copy of this license, visit
   http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/.


Market Basket Analysis
======================

The key question in the market basket analysis is what products are most
frequently purchased together.

To answer this question, we will want to build a table where each row is a
product, each column is a product, and the cell where two products intersect is
the count of the number of times they ended up in the same shopping cart.


.. code:: python3

   mb = pd.DataFrame({
       'doritos': {
           'oreos': 2,
           'snickers':6
       },
       'oreos': {
           'doritos': 2,
           'snickers': 3
       },
       'snickers': {
           'doritos': 6,
           'oreos':3
       },
   })

   mb


.. raw:: html

    <div>
    <style scoped>
        .dataframe tbody tr th:only-of-type {
            vertical-align: middle;
        }

        .dataframe tbody tr th {
            vertical-align: top;
        }

        .dataframe thead th {
            text-align: right;
        }
    </style>
    <table border="1" class="dataframe">
      <thead>
        <tr style="text-align: right;">
          <th></th>
          <th>doritos</th>
          <th>oreos</th>
          <th>snickers</th>
        </tr>
      </thead>
      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <th>doritos</th>
          <td>NaN</td>
          <td>2.0</td>
          <td>6.0</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <th>oreos</th>
          <td>2.0</td>
          <td>NaN</td>
          <td>3.0</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <th>snickers</th>
          <td>6.0</td>
          <td>3.0</td>
          <td>NaN</td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>
    </div>


Looking at the table, it is clear that Doritos and Snickers are most often
purchased together, because the total is 6. The next most common pair is
Snickers and Oreos, that just beat out Doritos and Oreos.

Looking at the table makes answering this question fairly straightforward. We
know what products have ended up in the same cart for thousands of carts.

The challenge is that we have a table with 49,688 columns and 49,688 rows. That
means we have 2,468,897,344 (that is more than 2 billion!) cells in our table.
How many of those cells do you think are empty?


.. code:: python3

   products = pd.read_csv('ecomm/products.csv')
   products.head()


.. raw:: html

    <div>
    <style scoped>
        .dataframe tbody tr th:only-of-type {
            vertical-align: middle;
        }

        .dataframe tbody tr th {
            vertical-align: top;
        }

        .dataframe thead th {
            text-align: right;
        }
    </style>
    <table border="1" class="dataframe">
      <thead>
        <tr style="text-align: right;">
          <th></th>
          <th>product_id</th>
          <th>product_name</th>
          <th>aisle_id</th>
          <th>department_id</th>
        </tr>
      </thead>
      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <th>0</th>
          <td>1</td>
          <td>Chocolate Sandwich Cookies</td>
          <td>61</td>
          <td>19</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <th>1</th>
          <td>2</td>
          <td>All-Seasons Salt</td>
          <td>104</td>
          <td>13</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <th>2</th>
          <td>3</td>
          <td>Robust Golden Unsweetened Oolong Tea</td>
          <td>94</td>
          <td>7</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <th>3</th>
          <td>4</td>
          <td>Smart Ones Classic Favorites Mini Rigatoni Wit...</td>
          <td>38</td>
          <td>1</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <th>4</th>
          <td>5</td>
          <td>Green Chile Anytime Sauce</td>
          <td>5</td>
          <td>13</td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>
    </div>


The most common operation we are going to want to use with this table is to look
up a product id to get more information about the product. So, let's make the
product_id the index of the DataFrame to make things faster.


.. code:: python3

   products.set_index('product_id', inplace=True)
   products.head()


.. raw:: html

    <div>
    <style scoped>
        .dataframe tbody tr th:only-of-type {
            vertical-align: middle;
        }

        .dataframe tbody tr th {
            vertical-align: top;
        }

        .dataframe thead th {
            text-align: right;
        }
    </style>
    <table border="1" class="dataframe">
      <thead>
        <tr style="text-align: right;">
          <th></th>
          <th>product_name</th>
          <th>aisle_id</th>
          <th>department_id</th>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <th>product_id</th>
          <th></th>
          <th></th>
          <th></th>
        </tr>
      </thead>
      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <th>1</th>
          <td>Chocolate Sandwich Cookies</td>
          <td>61</td>
          <td>19</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <th>2</th>
          <td>All-Seasons Salt</td>
          <td>104</td>
          <td>13</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <th>3</th>
          <td>Robust Golden Unsweetened Oolong Tea</td>
          <td>94</td>
          <td>7</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <th>4</th>
          <td>Smart Ones Classic Favorites Mini Rigatoni Wit...</td>
          <td>38</td>
          <td>1</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <th>5</th>
          <td>Green Chile Anytime Sauce</td>
          <td>5</td>
          <td>13</td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>
    </div>


.. code:: python3

   len(products)**2


.. parsed-literal::

    2468897344


Constructing an Item-Item Matrix
--------------------------------

Constructing a matrix of the kind shown above will take a bit of thought (and
time!). So let's do some design first.

1. Its a very good assumption that this data is sparse, so lets start by
   using a data structure that supports sparsity. â€“ A dictionary of
   dictionaries is the key to this. In fact scroll back just a bit and
   look carefully at how our DataFrame was constructed. You will notice
   a dictionary like this:


   .. code-block:: none

      {
          'doritos': {
              'oreos': 2,
              'snickers':6
          },
           'oreos': {
               'doritos': 2,
               'snickers': 3,
           },
           'snickers': {
               'doritos': 6,
               'oreos': 3,
           },
       }


   If you think about it, you will realise that we are storing twice as much
   data as we need to, since the matrix we are building is symmetric; the value
   at position ``(i, j)`` will always match the value at position ``(j, i)``,
   because the order of the products is not important.

2. The primary source of our data will be the ``order_products__train`` data.
   The data is sorted by the order number and the order in which products were
   added to the cart. We want to take each order as a group and add **all
   pairs** of items in a cart to the matrix.

3. We can take advantage of the symmetry by ordering the products in the same
   cart by their product id and always using the lower number as the first
   index.

Let's make a simple data file that matches our example and see how we can build
a sparse version of it.


.. parsed-literal::

  1 = doritos 2 = oreos 3 = snickers

  ordernum,product
  1, 1
  1, 2
  1, 3
  2, 1
  2, 3
  3, 1
  4, 1
  4, 2
  5, 1
  5, 3
  6, 1
  6, 3
  7, 1
  7, 3
  7, 3
  8, 2
  8, 3


.. code:: python3

   small_o = pd.read_csv('small_orders.csv')
   groups = small_o.groupby('ordernum')
   groups.get_group(6)


.. raw:: html

    <div>
    <style scoped>
        .dataframe tbody tr th:only-of-type {
            vertical-align: middle;
        }

        .dataframe tbody tr th {
            vertical-align: top;
        }

        .dataframe thead th {
            text-align: right;
        }
    </style>
    <table border="1" class="dataframe">
      <thead>
        <tr style="text-align: right;">
          <th></th>
          <th>ordernum</th>
          <th>product</th>
        </tr>
      </thead>
      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <th>10</th>
          <td>6</td>
          <td>1</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <th>11</th>
          <td>6</td>
          <td>3</td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>
    </div>


The ``get_group`` function is awesome! This allows us to get a data frame
containing only the items in one particular order. Now, if we are smart and
process the items from smallest to largest, we can build our dictionary-based
matrix easily.


.. code:: python3

   groups.get_group(1)['product'].sort_values()


.. parsed-literal::

   0    1
   1    2
   2    3
   Name: product, dtype: int64


.. code:: python3

   cart = groups.get_group(1)['product'].sort_values()
   cart.loc[1:]


.. parsed-literal::

   1    2
   2    3
   Name: product, dtype: int64


.. code:: python3

   for g in range(1,9):
       cart = groups.get_group(g)['product'].sort_values()
       for i in cart.index:
           for j in cart.loc[i+1:]:
               print(f"products {cart[i]} and {j} in cart")
       print("--")


.. parsed-literal::

   products 1 and 2 in cart
   products 1 and 3 in cart
   products 2 and 3 in cart
   --
   products 1 and 3 in cart
   --
   --
   products 1 and 3 in cart
   --
   products 1 and 3 in cart
   --
   products 1 and 3 in cart
   --
   products 1 and 2 in cart
   products 1 and 3 in cart
   products 2 and 3 in cart
   --
   products 2 and 3 in cart
   --


.. code:: python3

   mat = {}
   for g in range(1,9):
       cart = groups.get_group(g)['product'].sort_values().tolist()
       for i in range(len(cart)):
           print(mat)
           if cart[i] not in mat:
               mat[cart[i]] = {}
           for j in cart[(i+1):]:
               print(cart[i], j)
               mat[cart[i]][j] = mat[cart[i]].get(j, 0) + 1
       print("--")
   pd.DataFrame(mat)


.. parsed-literal::

   {}
   1 2
   1 3
   {1: {2: 1, 3: 1}}
   2 3
   {1: {2: 1, 3: 1}, 2: {3: 1}}
   --
   {1: {2: 1, 3: 1}, 2: {3: 1}, 3: {}}
   1 3
   {1: {2: 1, 3: 2}, 2: {3: 1}, 3: {}}
   --
   {1: {2: 1, 3: 2}, 2: {3: 1}, 3: {}}
   --
   {1: {2: 1, 3: 2}, 2: {3: 1}, 3: {}}
   1 3
   {1: {2: 1, 3: 3}, 2: {3: 1}, 3: {}}
   --
   {1: {2: 1, 3: 3}, 2: {3: 1}, 3: {}}
   1 3
   {1: {2: 1, 3: 4}, 2: {3: 1}, 3: {}}
   --
   {1: {2: 1, 3: 4}, 2: {3: 1}, 3: {}}
   1 3
   {1: {2: 1, 3: 5}, 2: {3: 1}, 3: {}}
   --
   {1: {2: 1, 3: 5}, 2: {3: 1}, 3: {}}
   1 2
   1 3
   {1: {2: 2, 3: 6}, 2: {3: 1}, 3: {}}
   2 3
   {1: {2: 2, 3: 6}, 2: {3: 2}, 3: {}}
   --
   {1: {2: 2, 3: 6}, 2: {3: 2}, 3: {}}
   2 3
   {1: {2: 2, 3: 6}, 2: {3: 3}, 3: {}}
   --


.. raw:: html

    <div>
    <style scoped>
        .dataframe tbody tr th:only-of-type {
            vertical-align: middle;
        }

        .dataframe tbody tr th {
            vertical-align: top;
        }

        .dataframe thead th {
            text-align: right;
        }
    </style>
    <table border="1" class="dataframe">
      <thead>
        <tr style="text-align: right;">
          <th></th>
          <th>1</th>
          <th>2</th>
          <th>3</th>
        </tr>
      </thead>
      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <th>2</th>
          <td>2</td>
          <td>NaN</td>
          <td>NaN</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <th>3</th>
          <td>6</td>
          <td>3.0</td>
          <td>NaN</td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>
    </div>


.. code:: python3

    mat


.. parsed-literal::

   {1: {2: 2, 3: 6}, 2: {3: 3}, 3: {}}


Now we have a "co-occurence matrix"; given one product, we an tell how often
that product is in the same shopping cart as many others. The matrix we have
built turns out to be a "lower triangular" matrix because we are only storing
the lower left. The upper right is symmetric so we can save half the storage!

**Important:** Saving storage often comes with an additional cost in complexity.
In this case, becuase we are building a "lower triangular" matrix, we have to be
careful if we want to get all of the products that are purchased together. We
cannot just look at the column corresponding to the product and we cannot just
look at the row corresponding to the product. If we wanted to know everything
purchased with product 2, we have to look at the row for 2 as well as the column
for 2. The row for 2 tells us that 2 was purchased with 1 (2 times) and the
column for 2 tells us that 2 was purchased with 3 (3 times). If we kept both
triangles we could look at either the row or the column.

Let's build the item item matrix for the instacart data and see what we can
learn!

The first thing we'll need is a list of unique order ids. In the toy example
above, we were able to just use a range of numbers, because we knew that the
numbers started at 1 and went sequentailly.


.. code:: python3

   order_products = pd.read_csv("ecomm/order_products__prior.csv")
   order_products.head()


.. raw:: html

    <div>
    <style scoped>
        .dataframe tbody tr th:only-of-type {
            vertical-align: middle;
        }

        .dataframe tbody tr th {
            vertical-align: top;
        }

        .dataframe thead th {
            text-align: right;
        }
    </style>
    <table border="1" class="dataframe">
      <thead>
        <tr style="text-align: right;">
          <th></th>
          <th>order_id</th>
          <th>product_id</th>
          <th>add_to_cart_order</th>
          <th>reordered</th>
        </tr>
      </thead>
      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <th>0</th>
          <td>2</td>
          <td>33120</td>
          <td>1</td>
          <td>1</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <th>1</th>
          <td>2</td>
          <td>28985</td>
          <td>2</td>
          <td>1</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <th>2</th>
          <td>2</td>
          <td>9327</td>
          <td>3</td>
          <td>0</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <th>3</th>
          <td>2</td>
          <td>45918</td>
          <td>4</td>
          <td>1</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <th>4</th>
          <td>2</td>
          <td>30035</td>
          <td>5</td>
          <td>0</td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>
    </div>


.. code:: python3

   import ipywidgets

   def log_progress(sequence, every=None, size=None, name='Items'):

       from ipywidgets import IntProgress, HTML, VBox
       from IPython.display import display

       is_iterator = False
       if size is None:
           try:
               size = len(sequence)
           except TypeError:
               is_iterator = True
       else:
           if every is None:
               if size <= 200:
                   every = 1
               else:
                   every = int(size / 200)     # every 0.5%
           else:
               assert every is not None, 'sequence is iterator, set every'

       if is_iterator:
           progress = IntProgress(min=0, max=1, value=1)
           progress.bar_style = 'info'
       else:
           progress = IntProgress(min=0, max=size, value=0)

       label = HTML()
       box = VBox(children=[label, progress])
       display(box)

       index = 0
       try:
           for index, record in enumerate(sequence, 1):
               if index == 1 or index % every == 0:
                   if is_iterator:
                       label.value = '{name}: {index} / ?'.format(
                           name=name,
                           index=index)
                   else:
                       progress.value = index
                       label.value = u'{name}: {index} / {size}'.format(
                           name=name,
                           index=index,
                           size=size)
               yield record
       except:
           progress.bar_style = 'danger'
           raise
       else:
           progress.bar_style = 'success'
           progress.value = index
           label.value = "{name}: {index}".format(
               name=name,
               index=str(index or '?'))


.. code:: python3

   %%time

   groups = order_products.groupby('order_id')
   unique_order_ids = order_products.order_id.unique()
   mat = {}
   for g in log_progress(unique_order_ids, size=len(unique_order_ids)):
       cart = groups.get_group(g)['product_id'].sort_values().tolist()
       for i in range(len(cart)):
           if cart[i] not in mat:
               mat[cart[i]] = {}
           for j in cart[i+1:]:
               mat[cart[i]][j] = mat[cart[i]].get(j,0) + 1


.. parsed-literal::

   VBox(children=(HTML(value=''), IntProgress(value=0, max=3214874)))

   CPU times: user 39min 39s, sys: 21.5 s, total: 40min
   Wall time: 40min 15s


A bit of analysis revealed that there are a HUGE number of entries in the matrix
that are a count of 1. These 1 time "co-purchases" don't give us much useful
information for recommending products, so let's save some memory and remove
them.

You can't remove things from a dictionary while you are iterating over a
dictionary. So we will need to make a list of keys to remove in one pass and
then delete them later.


.. code:: python3

   delkeys = []
   for i in mat.keys():
       for k,v in mat[i].items():
           if v == 1:
               delkeys.append((i,k))

   len(delkeys)


.. parsed-literal::

   21944168


21.9 million entries in our matrix are 1s.


.. code:: python3

   for i,j in delkeys:
       del mat[i][j]


.. code:: python3

   %%time

   smat = pd.SparseDataFrame(mat)
   smat.head()


.. parsed-literal::

   CPU times: user 10min 55s, sys: 33.8 s, total: 11min 29s
   Wall time: 11min 41s


We can check on the density of our sparse data structure by looking at its
density attribute.


.. code:: python3

   smat.density


.. parsed-literal::

   0.008275774966857377


And we see that it is only 0.8% full!

We can use ``idxmax`` to give us a series that for each column tells us the row
with the maximum value for that column.


.. code:: python3

   maxcols = smat.idxmax()
   maxcols = maxcols.dropna()


.. code:: python3

   %%time

   maxcc = 0
   maxrow = None
   maxcol = None
   for col, row in maxcols.astype(int).iteritems():
       if smat.loc[row, col] > maxcc:
           maxrow = row
           maxcol = col
           maxcc = smat.loc[row,col]


.. parsed-literal::

   CPU times: user 1.46 s, sys: 1.86 s, total: 3.32 s
   Wall time: 5.95 s


.. code:: python3

   maxcc


.. parsed-literal::

   62341.0


.. code:: python3

   maxrow


.. parsed-literal::

   47209


.. code:: python3

   maxcol


.. parsed-literal::

   13176


Testing The Item-Item Matrix
----------------------------

Let's test the matrix by doing some exploring. What are the two products most
commonly purchased together?


.. code:: python3

   print(f"product {maxrow} was purchased with {maxcol} {maxcc} times")


.. parsed-literal::

   product 47209 was purchased with 13176 62341.0 times


Because we were smart before and made the product_id the index of the products
table, we can use this nice lookup syntax to get the product name!


.. code:: python3

   products.loc[maxrow, 'product_name']


.. parsed-literal::

   'Organic Hass Avocado'


.. code:: python3

   products.loc[maxcol, 'product_name']


.. parsed-literal::

   'Bag of Organic Bananas'


.. code:: python3

   def get_product_by_id(df, idx):
       return df.loc[idx].product_name


Now, let's see what our real data has to say about the products that are bought
with Doritos.


.. code:: python3

   products[products.product_name.str.contains('Dorito')]


.. raw:: html

    <div>
    <style scoped>
        .dataframe tbody tr th:only-of-type {
            vertical-align: middle;
        }

        .dataframe tbody tr th {
            vertical-align: top;
        }

        .dataframe thead th {
            text-align: right;
        }
    </style>
    <table border="1" class="dataframe">
      <thead>
        <tr style="text-align: right;">
          <th></th>
          <th>product_name</th>
          <th>aisle_id</th>
          <th>department_id</th>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <th>product_id</th>
          <th></th>
          <th></th>
          <th></th>
        </tr>
      </thead>
      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <th>2144</th>
          <td>Doritos</td>
          <td>107</td>
          <td>19</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <th>12540</th>
          <td>Doritos Nacho Cheese Sandwich Crackers</td>
          <td>78</td>
          <td>19</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <th>42541</th>
          <td>Cheetos Flamin' Hot &amp; Doritos Dinamita Chile L...</td>
          <td>107</td>
          <td>19</td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>
    </div>


.. code:: python3

   def get_product_count(sp_mat, ix1, ix2):
       if ix1 > ix2:
           return sp_mat.loc[ix1, ix2]
       else:
           return sp_mat.loc[ix2, ix1]

   get_product_count(smat, 47209, 13176)


.. parsed-literal::

   62341.0


.. code:: python3

   def get_all_cocart(sp_mat, pid):
       """
       Return a Pandas series where the index is the product id of products that
       were in the same shopping cart.  The value indicates the count of those
       times. Remove the NA's.
       """
       return pd.concat((sp_mat[pid], sp_mat.loc[pid])).dropna()

   get_all_cocart(smat, 2144).nlargest(10)


.. parsed-literal::

   24852    68.0
   16797    41.0
   19734    34.0
   16696    25.0
   23909    25.0
   45064    24.0
   28199    23.0
   10673    21.0
   17122    21.0
   13249    17.0
   Name: 2144, dtype: float64


.. code:: python3

   for idx, val in get_all_cocart(smat, 2144).nlargest(10).iteritems():
       print(get_product_by_id(products,idx), val)


.. parsed-literal::

   Banana 68.0
   Strawberries 41.0
   Classic Mix Variety 34.0
   Coke Classic 25.0
   2% Reduced Fat Milk 25.0
   Honey Wheat Bread 24.0
   Clementines, Bag 23.0
   Original Nooks & Crannies English Muffins 21.0
   Honeycrisp Apples 21.0
   Skim Milk 17.0


.. code:: python3

   get_product_by_id(products, 2144)


.. parsed-literal::

   'Doritos'


.. code:: python3

   def product_search(df, name):
       prods = df.product_name.str.lower()
       return df[prods.str.contains(name)].product_name


.. code:: python3

   product_search(products, 'diapers')


.. parsed-literal::

   product_id
   15                                Overnight Diapers Size 6
   682                   Cruisers Diapers Jumbo Pack - Size 5
   765              Swaddlers Diapers Jumbo Pack Size Newborn
   879                                Baby Dry Diapers Size 4
   1304              Little Movers Comfort Fit Size 3 Diapers
   1716     Baby Dry Pampers Baby Dry Diapers Size 5 78 Co...
   3087              Baby Dry Pampers Baby Dry Diapers Size 2
   3277                 Overnight Diapers Sleepy Sheep Size 4
   4630     Baby Dry Pampers Baby Dry Newborn Diapers Size...
   5444     Little Snugglers Jumbo Pack Size 2 Disney Diap...
   5657                              Baby Dry Diapers  Size 5
   5897                               Baby Dry Diapers Size 3
   6401               Tender Care Diapers Jumbo Pack - Size 4
   6986     Diapers, Overnight, Free & Clear, Size 6 (35+ ...
   7487                              Swaddlers Diapers Size 1
   7489                   Swaddlers Size 4 Giant Pack Diapers
   8102                         Naty Diapers Size 1, 8-14 lbs
   9121                    Diapers Cruisers Size 4 Super Pack
   9356                              Swaddlers Size 2 Diapers
   9482                                        Diapers Size 1
   9927                             Size 4 Snug & Dry Diapers
   10011                                  Baby Diapers Size 2
   10420                                Honest Diapers Size 4
   11660                         Tribal Pastel Size 3 Diapers
   11745    Swaddlers Sensitive Diapers Jumbo Pack Size Ne...
   11922    Pants Pampers Easy Ups Training Pants Boys Siz...
   12340                     Free & Clear Size 4 Baby Diapers
   13377                    Swaddlers Diapers Jumbo Pack Size
   13801                Free & Clear Overnight Diapers Size 5
   14009                      Snug & Dry Diapers Step 1 Jumbo
                                  ...
   35954           Little Movers Diapers, Giant Pack - Size 5
   36200                      Baby Dry Diapers Size 6 Diapers
   36453                             Size 3 M  Skulls Diapers
   36831                  Cruisers Diapers Giant Pack, Size 6
   37172                                       Size 4 Diapers
   37872     Free & Clear Size 4 22-37 Lbs Disposable Diapers
   37949                  Diapers Swaddlers Size 2 (12-18 lb)
   38365                   Size 5 Cruisers Diapers Super Pack
   38899                         Little Movers Size 3 Diapers
   40110                            Giraffes Diapers Size 4 L
   40343                 Baby Dry Diapers Giant Pack - Size 6
   40355                   Baby Dry Size 4 Disposable Diapers
   40537          Free & Clear Stage 1 8-14 Lbs. Baby Diapers
   40916                                       Size 2 Diapers
   41393                              Baby Dry Size 4 Diapers
   41475                   Baby Dry Diapers Jumbo Pack Size 4
   41595                            Snug & Dry Size 2 Diapers
   41705                                Honest Diapers Size 3
   42923           Baby Free & Clear Size 3 16-28 Lbs Diapers
   43217    Honest Diapers Eco-Friendly & Premium Diapers ...
   43481                  Cruisers Diapers Jumbo Pack  Size 3
   43989                            Cruisers Diapers - Size 6
   44950                 Swaddlers Diapers Super Pack, Size 3
   45786            Little Movers Diapers Giant Pack - Size 3
   46583                       Tribal Pastel Size 4/L Diapers
   46599    Ultra Leakguards Value Pack Diapers Size 3 (16...
   46608       Free & Clear Newborn Up To 10 lbs Baby Diapers
   47578                                              Diapers
   47632                                       Honest Diapers
   48263                                Honest Diapers Size 5
   Name: product_name, Length: 93, dtype: object


.. code:: python3

   # snickers - 14261

   for idx, val in get_all_cocart(smat, 682).nlargest(10).iteritems():
       print(get_product_by_id(products,idx), val)


.. parsed-literal::

   Strawberries 13.0
   Banana 13.0
   Zero Rise Orange 7.0
   Organic Fuji Apple 7.0
   Baby Fresh Pampers Baby Wipes Baby Fresh 1X 64 count Baby Wipes 6.0
   Black Beans 6.0
   Honey Nut Cheerios 6.0
   Baby Wipes Sensitive 6.0
   Select-A-Size Paper Towels, White, 2 Huge Rolls = 5 Regular Rolls Towels/Napkins 5.0
   Peach Yoghurt 5.0


Cleaning Up and Saving
----------------------

Since building the item-item matrix takes some time, we should save it in a
format that is convenient for us to reload so we don't need to remake it every
time.

We can probably reduce the size of our sparse matrix by eliminating all of the
cells with a count of 1. That doesn't really tell us anything that we would want
to use in making a recommendation. We can also eliminate our original
dictionary.


.. code:: python3

   smat.to_pickle('item_item.pkl')


Understanding the Item-Item Matrix
----------------------------------

This kind of shopping cart analysis is useful in many areas. Whether it's news
articles, stocks, search terms, or products, this kind of recommender is widely
used in industry.

-  Create a histogram that shows the distribution of the shopping cart
   co-occurence counts.

-  How many items in this item-item matrix contain a count of 1? That is
   probably not good information and you could save a lot more memory by
   deleting all of the items with a count of 1 from smat.

-  Can you make a visualization of this item-item matrix?


.. code:: python3

   forhist = pd.DataFrame({'allvals': smat.values.flatten()})
   forhist = forhist.dropna()


.. code:: python3

   alt.Chart(forhist).mark_bar().encode(
       x=alt.X('allvals', bin=True),y='count()')


.. image:: Figures/Instacart_69_0.png


Experimenting with Item-Item Recommendations
--------------------------------------------

-  The histogram above shows that the vast majority of the items are in the
   0-200 co-occurence range. But the items purchased together outside that big
   bar are interesting. Write a function to print out the item pairs that have
   been in the same shopping cart more than 200 times.

-  Redo the histogram so that it focuses in on the products that have between 0
   and 200 co-occurrences.

-  Write a function called ``top_n`` that takes a product name to search for,
   allows the user to select the best match and then returns the top ``n``
   recommendatons for products that have been purchased with the selected item.

-  Write a function that takes a product id as its parameter and then recommends
   the top 10 products to go with the given product but from the same department
   or same aisle.

-  One of the problems with a recommender like this one is that it tends to
   recommend a lot of popular items. We might call this the banana problem in
   this dataset! Can you devise a strategy to recommend things that are not just
   the popular things?

-  Design an experiment in which you can train an item-item model like we have
   done above and then test it. Perhaps in the training set you withold that
   last item added to the shopping cart to see how frequently you can predict
   the last item based on the first items.

-  Challenge: The original collaborative filtering recommender system was not
   item-item like this was. It was user-user where the recommendations came from
   finding a group of users similar to the subject user based on their ratings
   or purchase behavior. The system would then recommend items to the subject
   user based on items that their similar users had purchased but the subject
   had not. Can you write such a recommender and devise an experiment to compare
   it to the item-item recommender?


**Lesson Feedback**

.. poll:: LearningZone_11_2
    :option_1: Comfort Zone
    :option_2: Learning Zone
    :option_3: Panic Zone

    During this lesson I was primarily in my...

.. poll:: Time_11_2
    :option_1: Very little time
    :option_2: A reasonable amount of time
    :option_3: More time than is reasonable

    Completing this lesson took...

.. poll:: TaskValue_11_2
    :option_1: Don't seem worth learning
    :option_2: May be worth learning
    :option_3: Are definitely worth learning

    Based on my own interests and needs, the things taught in this lesson...

.. poll:: Expectancy_11_2
    :option_1: Definitely within reach
    :option_2: Within reach if I try my hardest
    :option_3: Out of reach no matter how hard I try

    For me to master the things taught in this lesson feels...