.. Copyright (C)  Google, Runestone Interactive LLC
   This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0
   International License. To view a copy of this license, visit
   http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/.


Graphing Relationships Between Countries
========================================

One thing that we might expect to come out of a bunch of people at the United
Nations making speeches is that one country might mention another country. In
fact, this probably happens quite frequently. In this section, we are interested
in how we might visualize the relationship of one country talking about another
country. We will do this in two ways: first as a "heatmap", second as a
**graph**.

Preparing the Data
------------------

Both of these visualization rely on us processing the data in the speeches, to
create pairs of countries based on one country mentioning the other in a speech.
In fact, what we are going for will be a table that looks like this.


.. csv-table::

   speaking_c, referenced_c, ref_count
   USA, CAN, 1234
   USA, KOR, 987


The columns are:

* ``speaking_c``: The country doing the speaking
* ``referenced_c``: The country that is referenced
* ``ref_count``: The number of times a reference is made over all speeches

When we are all done, we will put them together into a matrix that will have the
country codes as the rows and the columns, and the cells will contain the count
of the number of references.

This project might sounds a bit ambitious to tackle all at once, so it's
probably a good idea to limit the number of countries and the number of years to
something more manageable, and more importantly, something we can check by hand.
So, let's limit our countries to the United States, Canada, Cuba, and Mexico for
the years 2014 and 2015. The corresponding three letter country codes are USA,
CAN, CUB, and MEX.

Next, we'll want to combine all of the speeches made by each country into one
long string. You can arrange it so that the index of the resulting series is the
three letter country code.


.. fillintheblank:: un_fb_len1

   What is the length of the resulting string for MEX? |blank|

   - :19202: Is the correct answer
     :2: There are two rows from MEX, combine the text into a single row
     :9154: That is the length of the first row for MEX, combine them
     :x: SUM is often used for numbers, but it also works to concatenate text


Of course, countries do not refer to each other in speeches by their country
codes, so you will want to add country name as a new column to the DataFrame. By
now, you know of many sources for country codes, so I'll leave that to you to
choose whatever strategy you want to add country name.

At this point, you should have a DataFrame that looks like this.


.. raw:: html

    <table border="1" class="dataframe">
        <thead>
            <tr style="text-align: right;">
            <th></th>
            <th>text</th>
            <th>country</th>
            </tr>
            <tr>
            <th>code</th>
            <th></th>
            <th></th>
            </tr>
        </thead>
        <tbody>
            <tr>
            <th>CAN</th>
            <td>It is both \nan honour and a pleasure for me t...</td>
            <td>Canada</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
            <th>CUB</th>
            <td>We live in a globalized world that is moving t...</td>
            <td>Cuba</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
            <th>MEX</th>
            <td>As \nPresident of Mexico, it is a high honour ...</td>
            <td>Mexico</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
            <th>USA</th>
            <td>We come together at a \ncrossroads between war...</td>
            <td>United States of America</td>
            </tr>
        </tbody>
    </table>


You might think that counting the number of times Mexico refers to Cuba will be
hard, but it is actually fairly straightforward, with only one line of code. See
if you can think of it before looking at the solution.


.. reveal:: mex_to_cuba

   .. code:: python3

      test_cases.loc['MEX'].text.count('Cuba')


What about counting the number of times that ALL the countries mention Cuba?
Your first thought might be to write a for loop, but you don't need to do that.
(Remember the ``str`` object that we can use with a Series.)

The answer should look like this.


.. code-block:: none

   code
   CAN     0
   CUB    27
   MEX     3
   USA     7
   Name: text, dtype: int64


This tells us that Canada did not mention Cuba at all in 2014 or 2015. Cuba
referred to itself 27 times, Mexico referred to Cuba 3 times, and the United
States referred to Cuba 7 times.

This feels like we are almost there! If we can convert the above result into a
DataFrame, and add CUB as the ``referenced_c``, column we could repeat this for
each country and concatenate all of the small DataFrames together into one large
DataFrame.

Hint: Use ``pd.concat``. Contrary to previous advice, it is very difficult to do
this without iterating over the rows of the data frame. If you can do it without
a for loop, please tell your instructor!

Your initial result should look like this.

.. raw:: html

    <table border="1" class="dataframe">
    <thead>
        <tr style="text-align: right;">
        <th></th>
        <th>text</th>
        <th>referenced_c</th>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>code</th>
        <th></th>
        <th></th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
        <th>CAN</th>
        <td>40</td>
        <td>CAN</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>CUB</th>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>CAN</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>MEX</th>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>CAN</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>USA</th>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>CAN</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>CAN</th>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>CUB</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>CUB</th>
        <td>27</td>
        <td>CUB</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>MEX</th>
        <td>3</td>
        <td>CUB</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>USA</th>
        <td>7</td>
        <td>CUB</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>CAN</th>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>MEX</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>CUB</th>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>MEX</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>MEX</th>
        <td>20</td>
        <td>MEX</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>USA</th>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>MEX</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>CAN</th>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>USA</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>CUB</th>
        <td>2</td>
        <td>USA</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>MEX</th>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>USA</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>USA</th>
        <td>1</td>
        <td>USA</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
    </table>


.. reveal:: narrow_sol
   :instructoronly:

   Here's the nicest solution for this I can think of:

   .. code:: python3

      dfl = []
      for row in test_cases.itertuples():
          dfl.append(pd.DataFrame(test_cases.text.str.count(row.country)))
          dfl[-1]['referenced_c'] = row.Index


Admittedly, this table is a bit hard to read in this format. It is much easier
to read if we use our pivoting skills to make a table like this.


.. raw:: html

    <table border="1" class="dataframe">
    <thead>
        <tr style="text-align: right;">
        <th>referenced_c</th>
        <th>CAN</th>
        <th>CUB</th>
        <th>MEX</th>
        <th>USA</th>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>speaking_c</th>
        <th></th>
        <th></th>
        <th></th>
        <th></th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
        <th>CAN</th>
        <td>40</td>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>0</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>CUB</th>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>27</td>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>2</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>MEX</th>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>3</td>
        <td>20</td>
        <td>0</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>USA</th>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>7</td>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>1</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
    </table>


**Challenge:** Another way to go about this is to start by creating a DataFrame
that looks like this.


.. raw:: html

    <div>
    <table border="1" class="dataframe">
    <thead>
        <tr style="text-align: right;">
        <th>code_3</th>
        <th>CAN</th>
        <th>CUB</th>
        <th>MEX</th>
        <th>USA</th>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>code_3</th>
        <th></th>
        <th></th>
        <th></th>
        <th></th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
        <th>CAN</th>
        <td>40</td>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>0</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>CUB</th>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>27</td>
        <td>3</td>
        <td>7</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>MEX</th>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>20</td>
        <td>0</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>USA</th>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>2</td>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>1</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
    </table>
    </div>


You will notice that this is flipped from our original, but we can easily fix
that later. The challenge is to see if you can do it with just three lines of
code.


**Check Your Understanding**

.. fillintheblank:: un_fb_count2

   If we consider all of the years starting with 2000 and after, how many times
   does Mexico refer to Canada?

   - :3: Is the correct answer
     :1: Is the number of times Canada refers to Mexico
     :x: This is the same as before, but with more years


Visualizing the Relationships with a Heatmap
--------------------------------------------

We will now look at a way to get a better visual representation of the table we
have built, first using a **heatmap** and then using a **graph.**

The result we are after for our 2014, 2015 dataset looks like this.


.. figure:: Figures/heatmap1.png


With the narrow representation of the data, it is easy to have Altair make a
heatmap using using a ``mark_bar`` and encoding y axis as the ``speaking_c``,
the x axis as the ``referenced_c``, and the color as ``ref_count``.


.. code:: python3

   alt.Chart(narrow_test, height=200, width=200).mark_rect().encode(
       x='speaking_c:O',
       y='referenced_c:O',
       color='ref_count:Q'
   )


The graph immediately visualizes that very few countries seem to reference the
United States. This seems a bit strange...


.. shortanswer:: un_sa_explainusa

   Can you explain why the United States has so few references? Is it a bug in
   our code? Is there something else going on?  How can we fix it?


Another issue that the graph brings up is the problem with using the raw counts.
Some countries are quite wordy, and others are less so, therefore it would be
better to keep track of the percentages. That is, of all the countries
referenced, Mexico references itself 87% of the time and Cuba 13% of the time.

Let's iterate on this analysis and see what we learn.

1.  Update the country name for the USA to be United States instead of United
    States of America.
2.  Make the values for each country percentage based.


.. fillintheblank:: un_fb_usacount

   With the above changes in place, how many times does Cuba refer to the United
   States? |blank| What percentage is that? |blank|

   - :12: Is the correct answer
     :0: Is the answer for 'United States of America'
     :x: Double check to make sure you

   - :(0.307|.307|0.31|.31): Is correct
     :0: Is not correct
     :x: Create a new column for the percentage value using the ``apply`` method


Your new heatmap should look like this.


.. image:: Figures/heatmap2.png


Now, try to make your heatmap for these countries across all years, then move on
to making a heatmap for all countries across all years.


.. fillintheblank:: un_bg_numwords

   The problem with "United States of America" may be a general problem with
   other country names as well. How many country names are three words long or
   longer?

   - :24: Is the correct answer
     :23: You may be missing the United States of America
     :x: Use str.split to create a list of words for each country name.


If you inspect the data, you will see that many of the problem country names
follow a pattern of ``name (something something in parens)``. You can fix a
bunch of these by replacing the name that has the parentheses with just the
name. The ``str.extract`` function will be really useful to solve this.

To make a graph of all of the countries is a little overwhelming. So you may
want to narrow it down to a group of approximately 12 related countries, just to
get something a little more interesting and interpretable. For example, use one
of our earlier datasets to get all of the three letter country codes for
countries in the same region.

You should also take a moment to step back and reflect on how we have built this
in an incremental fashion, but how it continues to work at full scale. This is a
very satisfying part of programming and data analysis! You have to enjoy your
victories while you can.


Visualizing the Relationships with a Graph
------------------------------------------

The good news is that we have already done most of the hard work in the last
section. This section will be all about how we can visualize that work in a
different way. For this visualization, we are going to represent each country
with a circle, and when one country talks about another, we'll represent that by
a line between the two circles. Our small example would look like this.


.. image:: Figures/Digraph.gv.png


The arrows on the graph indicate which country is referencing which other
country. Formally, we call the ovals with the country names **nodes**, and the
arrows connecting them **edges**. One of the most common ways that computer
scientists and mathematicians represent a graph is called an adjacency matrix.
Don't worry if this sounds daunting, you have actually already built an
adjacency matrix!


.. raw:: html

    <table border="1" class="dataframe">
    <thead>
        <tr style="text-align: right;">
        <th>referenced_c</th>
        <th>CAN</th>
        <th>CUB</th>
        <th>MEX</th>
        <th>USA</th>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>speaking_c</th>
        <th></th>
        <th></th>
        <th></th>
        <th></th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
        <th>CAN</th>
        <td>40</td>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>0</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>CUB</th>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>27</td>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>2</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>MEX</th>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>3</td>
        <td>20</td>
        <td>0</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
        <th>USA</th>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>7</td>
        <td>0</td>
        <td>1</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
    </table>


In an adjacency matrix, the cells indicate if there is an edge from the row node
to the column node. The values in the cells are often used to represent a weight
or cost to go from one node to the other. A 0 in the cell indicates that there
is no relationship.

A second common way to represent a graph is through an **edge list**. Our narrow
representation that we built originally for this project fits that description
perfectly. Even the names we chose for the columns (``speaking_c``,
``referenced_c``) suggest a graph like relationship.

There are two graph packages we can use: ``networkx`` and ``graphviz``. It's not
clear that one is clear preferable over the other; each has some strengths and
weaknesses and in fact they can be used together to some extent. ``graphviz``
may be a little easier to use, since the file format is easy to edit, and can
draw pretty graphs out of the box. The graph above was drawn using ``graphviz``.
You will need to install both ``networkx`` and ``graphviz`` on your computer.

Both packages are well documented.

* `Graphviz <https://graphviz.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html>`_
* `Overview of NetworkX <https://networkx.github.io/documentation/stable/>`_

Let's look at some example code that shows how easy it was to build the graph
above.


.. code:: python3

   from graphviz import Digraph
   g = Digraph()
   g.edge('USA', 'Mexico')
   g.edge('Mexico', 'Cuba')
   g.edge('Cuba', 'USA')
   g.edge('USA', 'Cuba')
   g.edge('Canada', 'Canada')
   g


Using ``networkx``, we can build the graph directly from the DataFrame, but the
graph produced is not very aesthetically pleasing.


.. code:: python3

   g = nx.from_pandas_edgelist(narrow_test[narrow_test.ref_count > 0],
                           'speaking_c',
                           'referenced_c',
                           edge_attr='ref_count',
                          create_using=nx.DiGraph)
   pos = graphvix_layout(g)
   nx.draw(g, pos)
   nx.draw_networkx_labels(g, pos)


The above produces a rather unattractive graph.


.. image:: Figures/networkx1.png


The graph is missing the arrows, the text doesn't fit, and the bright red is a
bit alarming for no good reason. The layout is also not very easy to understand.
We can immediately do much better by saving the graph we created with
``networkx`` as a dot file and then reading it back again and letting
``graphviz`` render the graph for us.


.. code:: python3

   from networkx.drawing.nx_agraph import write_dot
   from graphviz import Source

   write_dot(g, 'mydots.dot')
   s = Source.from_file('mydots.dot')
   s


This produces a much nicer looking graph.


.. image:: Figures/mydots.dot.png


As with many tools, it's easy to get 80% done in a pretty quick way, but if you
want to make a graph worthy of a polished presentation, that last 20% can take
some work. If we want to clean up the labels on the nodes to use the real names
of the countries and add labels to the edges, we'll have to combine what we have
learned from the above examples and add our edges to a graphviz graph manually.

Pick a subregion to focus on, and build a graph where you label the edges with
the fraction of times mentioned, using the real name of the country as the title
of each node.


Projects for Further Exploration
--------------------------------

* Graph visualizations also lend themselves to literature. Check out this
  visualization of the interactions between the characters in the
  `Lord of the Rings <http://lotrproject.com/statistics/books/cooccurrences>`_.
  You could make a similar visualization of a book.
  `Project Gutenberg <https://www.gutenberg.org/>`_ offers over 58,000 books
  that you are free to use for nearly any purpose.

* Since graphing each country of the world individually is a bit difficult,
  build a heatmap or graph of how the countries within each subregion reference
  each other. There are about 22 sub regions in the
  `country_codes <../_static/country_codes.csv>`_ data file, which is quite
  manageable.

* Find or create a group of topics and build a heatmap or a graph to visualize
  which countries or regions are most interested in those topics. We are
  defining "interest" to be somehow related to the number of times those topics
  come up in their UN speeches.

* **Challenge:** A
  `chord diagram <https://python-graph-gallery.com/chord-diagram/>`_ is another
  great way to visualize relationships. Create a chord diagram to visualize the
  relationships between countries.


**Lesson Feedback**

.. poll:: LearningZone_8_5
    :option_1: Comfort Zone
    :option_2: Learning Zone
    :option_3: Panic Zone

    During this lesson I was primarily in my...

.. poll:: Time_8_5
    :option_1: Very little time
    :option_2: A reasonable amount of time
    :option_3: More time than is reasonable

    Completing this lesson took...

.. poll:: TaskValue_8_5
    :option_1: Don't seem worth learning
    :option_2: May be worth learning
    :option_3: Are definitely worth learning

    Based on my own interests and needs, the things taught in this lesson...

.. poll:: Expectancy_8_5
    :option_1: Definitely within reach
    :option_2: Within reach if I try my hardest
    :option_3: Out of reach no matter how hard I try

    For me to master the things taught in this lesson feels...