.. Copyright (C)  Google, Runestone Interactive LLC
    This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0
    International License. To view a copy of this license, visit
    http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/.

Correlation versus Causation {#correlation-versus-causation}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is clear that schools with higher median SAT scores also have higher
completion rates, but you should be very careful about what conclusions
you can draw from that information. Just because two variables have a
strong relationship, does not necessarily mean that one can influence
the other.

While it may be tempting to conclude that higher average SAT scores lead
to higher completion rates, there may be other reasons that the
relationship between the two variables is so strong. Perhaps students
with higher SAT scores prefer to go to schools with higher completion
rates. Alternatively, schools with larger endowments can both be more
selective *and* have more resources to support students towards
graduation. This is an example of what we call a **lurking (or
confounding) variable**. A lurking variable influences both the
explanatory and explained variable, which leads to an association even
though there is no causal relationship between the two. For example, the
size of a school’s endowment can explain both average SAT score and
completion rate. Once this lurking variable is found, it no longer makes
sense for a college to attempt to increase the average SAT scores of
their new students in order to increase completion rate. Instead, it
would make more sense to focus on increasing their endowment size.

As another example, the number of ice cream cones sold in a month is
highly correlated with the number of sunburns. However, intuitively, you
are aware that ice cream consumption does not *cause* sunburns, just as
you are aware that getting a sunburn doesn’t (directly) make someone eat
more ice cream. Both of these variables, ice cream consumption and
sunburn prevalence, are higher in warmer months than in cooler months,
and in warmer locations than cooler locations. There is a strong
association between the number of ice cream cones sold and the frequency
of sunburns, but that is not enough to establish causation. In general,
**correlation does not imply causation**: that is, just because two
variables share a strong relationship, does not necessarily mean that
one causes the other. However, `the news often confuses correlation and
causation <http://www.rebeccabarter.com/cv/talks/Cal_Day_Presentation.pdf>`__.

To understand the nuance of causation, you need to be aware of any
lurking variables. In this case, temperature is a lurking variable: as
temperature increases, both sunburn prevalence and ice cream consumption
increase.

Question: Suppose we found a correlation of r = -0.48 between red wine
consumption and incidence of heart attacks. Which of the following would
be appropriate conclusions?

1. Drinking red wine reduces the probability of heart attack.
2. Drinking red wine increases the probability of heart attack.
3. Having a heart attack decreases the probability of drinking red wine.
4. Drinking red wine is associated with a reduction in heart attack
   risk.

Question: Suppose we found a positive association between the frequency
of dining out and dental health (so those who ate out more had better
dental health). What is a possible lurking variable?

1. Diet
2. Activity Level
3. Income or Wealth
4. Frequency of Flossing

In this section you learned:

-  The relationship between two quantitative variables can be displayed
   and investigated by constructing a **scatter plot**.
-  A scatter plot can be described in terms of the **direction**,
   **strength** and **linearity** of the relationship between the two
   variables.
-  **Correlation** is a number between -1 and 1 that describes the
   linear relationship between two variables.

   -  If the correlation is close to 1, the variables have a strong,
      positive relationship.
   -  If the correlation is close to -1, the variables have a strong,
      negative relationship.
   -  If the correlation is close to 0, the variables do not have a
      strong linear relationship. (They may have a nonlinear
      relationship.)

-  If two variables are strongly correlated, that does not necessarily
   mean that changes in one variable *cause* changes in the other
   variable. There could be a **lurking variable**, the cause could work
   in the other direction, or it could be random chance.
